          The MeSsI (Merging Systems Identification) Algortihm

Developed by Martín de los Rios, Mariano Dominguez, Dante Páz & Manuel Merchán.

If you use this algorithm please cite:  de los Rios et al. 2016 (1509.02524) 

If you find a bug, please dont hesitate in contact us at: martindelosrios13@gmail.com

1 Introduction

  The MeSsI Algorithm is a software that performs an automatic 
classiffication between merging and relaxed clusters.
This method was calibrated using mock catalogues constructed from 
the millenium simulation, and perform the classiffication using 
some machine learning techniques, namely random forest for 
classiffication and mixture of gaussians for the substructure 
identification, for more details read de los Rios et al. 2016 (1509.02524).

2 Installation

  This software was developed completly using R-languaje (https://cran.r-project.org/) and uses a lot of packages developed by other users.
  You will need to install R and all the necessary packages for a correctly use of MeSsI.

  * For the R installation, you can follow the instructions in "https://cran.r-project.org" 
  * For the packages installation you can use the install.packages() R-function. The packages that you will need are:

   -nortest
   -cosmoFns
   -mclust
   -e1071 
   -randomForest
   -beepr
   -foreach (only for parallel computation)
   -doParallel (only for parallel computation)
   -doSNOW (only for parallel computation)

   With the following script in an R-session you can install all the neccesary packages at once:

   install.packages(c('nortest','cosmoFns','mclust','e1071','randomForest','beepr','foreach','doParallel','doSNOW'))
   
3 Basic usage
 
  All the configuration is contained in the messi.config.R file, you will have to modify this file for your usage.
  In this file you will find the following options:

  * input.file.name: This is the name of the file where the galaxies
    information is stored, the default is 'prueba.dat' and it must 
    have the same structure as 'prueba.dat', that is to say, 6 tab 
    seppareted columns named 'ra', 'dec', 'z', 'mag', 'color' 
    and 'id', where 'ra', 'dec' and 'z' ar the galaxies positions,
    'mag' are the R-band magnitudes (or equivalent), 'color' are
    the G-R colors and 'id' is a number that indicate to which 
    clusters belong each galaxy. 
  
  * name_trainset_cum: This is the name of the trainset file for 
    the clusters. The default is 'trainset_cum.dat'. If you want
    to change the trainset for the clusters you must preserved the
    same structured as 'trainset_cum.dat', i.e the column names
    and the tab seppareted values. You can generate a file with
    this structure changing the messi_train.R configuration. 
    See section 4 for more details

  * name_trainset_gal: This is the name of the trainset file for 
    the galaxies. The default is 'trainset_gal.dat'. If you want
    to change the trainset for the galaxies you must preserved the
    same structured as 'trainset_gal.dat', i.e the column names
    and the tab seppareted values. You can generate a file with
    this structure changing the messi_train.R configuration. 
    See section 4 for more details 
  
  * folder: This is the name of the folder where all the information 
    will be stored, the default is 'prueba_messi'.

  * name.gal: This is the name of the output file where the galaxies 
    properties will be stored. The default is 'estadisticos_galaxias.dat'.

  * name.groups: This is the name of the output file where the 
    clusters properties will be stored. The default is 'estadisticos_grupos.dat'.

  * rank.name: This is the name of the output file where the 
    merging-classification properties will be stored.The default 
    is 'ranking.dat'

  * relaxed.name: This is the name of the output file where the 
    relaxed-classification properties will be stored. The default 
    is 'ranking_relaxed.dat'.

  * nrank: This is the number of random forest instances that you want to do

  * cum: If TRUE, the program will estimate all the clusters properties.
  * gal: If TRUE, the program will estimate all the galaxies properties.
  * rank: If TRUE, the program will performed a classification between
          merging or not-merging clusters.
  * relaxed: If TRUE, the program will performed a classification 
             between relaxed or not-relaxed clusters.
  * ncluster: Is the number of clusters you will use for the computation.
              if you set it to 0, the computation will not be parallel. 

 Once you have modify your messi.config.R file you can run the messi
 algorithm from a terminal with the following script

 Rscript messi.R -f messi.config.R

4 Building a new trainset

 If you want to build a new trainset, you can do it, modifying the 
 messi_train.R file and then runnning from terminal the following script

 Rscript messi.R -t messi_train.R

 The messi_train.R have the following configuration parameters:

 * input.file.name: This is the name of the file where the galaxies 
   information is stored. It must have the same structure as 
   'prueba_train_cum.dat', that is to say, 6 tab seppareted columns 
   named 'ra', 'dec', 'z', 'mag', 'color','id' and 'class', 
   where 'ra', 'dec' and 'z' ar the galaxies positions, 'mag' are the
   R-band magnitudes (or equivalent), 'color' are the G-R colors, 'id'
   is a number that indicate to which clusters belong each galaxy and
   'class' is a flag for the galaxy classification. 1 correspond to
   galaxies that belong to the substructures that are in the merger
   proccess and 0 are galaxies that do not belong to the substructures
   that are in the merging process.   
 
 * id.file.name: This is the name of the file where the cluster 
   classification is stored. It must have the same structure as 
   'id_cum.dat', that is to say 3 tab seppareted columns names
   'id', 'id_mer', 'id_rel', where 'id' is the identification number
   of the cluster, 'id_mer' is a flag for the cluster classification,
   1 are merging clusters and 0 are not merging clusters, and 'id_rel'
   is another flag for the cluster classification, 1 is for relaxed
   clusters and 0 is for not relaxed clusters. 
   NOTE: A cluster can not have id_mer=1 and id_rel=1 but it can have
   id_mer=0 and id_rel=0, i.e. a cluster can not be a relaxed and a
   merging cluster at the same time, but it can be a cluster that
   is not a merging nor a relaxed clusters, because we consider
   merging cluster those that have a recent major merger and relaxed
   cluster those that have not have a recent major merger in the last
   Gyr, so there are clusters that are between this to classes.

 * name.groups: This is the name of the output file where the 
   clusters properties will be stored. The default is 
   'trainset_cum.dat'

 * name.gal: This is the name of the output file where the galaxies
   properties will be stored. The default is 'trainset_cum.dat'

 * folder: This is the name of the folder where all the information 
   will be stored. The default is the working directory.

